# Overview
the main purpose of the nacelle are to mount and protect the propellers and guide fluid flow. the horizontal nacelles are to be mounted on all 4 corners of the sub, between the 2 plates, at a 45 degree angle. this placement will allow them to perform forward, backward, left, and right propulsion. it was designed to print in 3 sections: the main body and 2 guards/cones. the guards were designed separately for motor insertion and maintenance as well as quick replacement in case of a break. the guards will screw in to the body at 4 points at each end. inside of the body at the center there is the motor mount. the motor mount has 4 holes, 3 for screwing in the motor and one for the cable to route out of. one of the arms on the mount has a cut out track for the cable to continue routing out and away from the nacelle. the cable will route to a track of other cables.
# Specifications 
the length of the nacelle needed to be just longer that the distance between the 2 mounting rods. the rods are 11 cm apart and i added 1 cm on each side for strong mounts to them. the height of the nacelle fills the entire distance between the top and bottom plates; 11.5 cm. in order to cut down on size i decided to just have cylindrical spacers along the mounting rods rather than have the whole body take up the distance. the width of the nacelles had to fit between the corner of the plate and the location of the vertical nacelles. 9.85 cm was chosen to give ample room for the vertical nacelles. 
