Documents/Software Documentation/Software List & Explainer.md, before:

---
subtitle: Olympic College Engineering Club
title: |

  Unmanned Underwater Vehicle Software Documentation
---

> ***[NOTE:]{.underline}** This is a "**[living
> document]{.underline}**", and as such will be updated on a
> semi-regular basis. Please ensure you have the **[latest
> version]{.underline}** of this document at all times.*

Table of Contents

[Overview 3](#overview)

[Arduino 4](#arduino)

[Overview 4](#overview-1)

[List of Tasks 4](#list-of-tasks)

[Main 4](#main)

[Raspberry Pi 6](#raspberry-pi)

[Overview 6](#overview-2)

[List of Tasks 6](#list-of-tasks-1)

[Operator Computer 7](#operator-computer)

[Overview 7](#overview-3)

# Overview

This document serves as a comprehensive reference for all software
programs necessary for the operation of Olympic College Engineering
Club's (OCEC) Unmanned Underwater Vehicle (UUV). This is a "living
document", and as such will be updated on a sem-regular basis. Please
ensure you have the most recent version of this document at all times.
This document consists only of a list and explanation for the software
of the project, and does not contain any source code or compiled binary
code. Please see the appropriate section on the project's GitHub
repository for the source code.

Software tasks on board the UUV are handled by two main components: A
miniature computer called a Raspberry Pi (RasPi), and a microcontroller
called an Arduino. The Raspberry Pi is the more powerful of the two, so
the majority of computational tasks are run there. Programs for the
RasPi will be written primarily in Python 3.0, which is considered a
beginner-friendly programming language. The Arduino is responsible for
controlling servos and motors by sending the control signals that those
components expect, as well as receive data from sensors and reporting it
to the Raspberry Pi. Programs for the Arduino are written in C++, which
is a somewhat more involved language that may be challenging for
beginners to learn. Arduinos do not have and operating system to handle
multiple programs running at once, so only a single program can be
uploaded to and run by the Arduino at any one time. To make the software
easier to write, maintain, and understand, the Arduino program will be
broken down into smaller parts that the "main" program will compile into
a single binary file, which gets uploaded to the Arduino.

In addition to the UUV's onboard computers, a laptop computer is used by
the operator to control the vehicle and view telemetry coming from it.
The program for interfacing with the UUV from this "operator computer"
will be written in Python, and the operator computer will communicate
with the UUV's Raspberry Pi over an Ethernet connection. The operator
computer will also be connected to a gamepad controller, which is the
primary means of controlling the vehicle. Controller input data are read
by the operator computer, and sent to the vehicle's onboard RasPi for
processing. Video data from the vehicle's camera and sensor data from
the various sensors will be displayed on the operator computer screen as
part of the operator program.

The RasPi and Arduino communicate over a serial connection between them.
Arduino has built-in functionality to send and receive data over serial,
and the Raspberry Pi software will use the Python serial library to read
and send data. Messages between the two will be in a standardized form
to make communication predictable and modular.

# Arduino

## Overview

The UUV uses an Arduino Mega 2560 for most of the interaction between
the software layer and the electronics layer. The digital and analog
pins on the Arduino connect to sensors (eg. thermistors, gyroscope,
accelerometer, etc), thruster motors via electronic speed controls
(ESCs), servos, and any other peripheral devices on board the vehicle.
The Arduino communicates with the UUV's onboard computer (the Raspberry
Pi) to report sensor data and receive commands for motor power and servo
angle, etc. Programs for the Arduino are written in C++, and the Arduino
can only have one program uploaded & running at any time. To make
programming for the Arduino easier to manage and more collaborative, its
software will be divided into smaller sub-programs, each of which
contain the functionality for a single aspect of the Arduino's
responsibilities, and which will be combined into the "main" program at
compile time using the "include" keyword in C++.

## List of Tasks

The following is a list (in no particular order) of all the tasks that
the Arduino program needs to be able to complete. Each item on this list
can be partitioned into its own sub-program.

-   Send and receive serial data to and from the Raspberry Pi.

-   Interpret received commands from the RasPi and call corresponding
    functions.

-   Package data from sensors into messages to send to RasPi.

-   Set motors (via ESCs) to a specific speed value.

-   Set servo(s) to a specific angle value.

-   Read sensor data from analog sensors and digital sensors. Each
    sensor will have its own sub-program that interfaces with the sensor
    according to the datasheet and pinout of the sensor.

Each of these tasks is elaborated on below.

## Main

The main program of the Arduino is the program that will be used when
compiling and uploading to the Arduino. In order to use functions from
the sub-programs, each sub-program should be included in the main
program using the "include" keyword at the beginning of the file. This
will also require the sub-program's file to be located in a directory in
the "include path" of the compiler (or the include path of the compiler
is updated to add the directory where the sub-programs are already
located). The main program is also where global variables are declared &
defined, so that they can be passed to any functions that need them.

Arduino programs are made up of two primary functions: the "setup"
function, and the "loop" function. The setup function runs once whenever
the program starts, which happens when the program is uploaded to the
board, when the board is powered up if the program is already uploaded,
and also if the "reset" button on the board is pressed while the board
is running. The "setup" function in the main program should be used for
tasks like setting the serial baud rate (the rate that signals are sent
over the serial connection), initializing any objects that will be used
in the program (eg. "Servo" objects for servos and ESCs), etc. The loop
function runs after the setup function completes, and it also runs every
time it finishes, which results in it running indefinitely as long as
the Arduino is powered. This is where the majority of calls to the
functions from sub-programs will be located, as many of them need to be
constantly operating for as long as the vehicle is powered on. Examples
of tasks that need to be completed every loop cycle are: reading the
information from the serial connection to the Raspberry Pi, reading the
values of all connected sensors, updating speeds and angles for ESCs and
servos, sending telemetry to the Raspberry Pi over the serial
connection, etc. Keeping the loop function readable is very important,
which is part of why the tasks of the Arduino are partitioned off into
sub-programs. Descriptive function names that only take one line of code
are easier to read than long sections of loops and conditional
statements that achieve that same thing.

# Raspberry Pi

## Overview

The Raspberry Pi is the main computer onboard the UUV. It is responsible
for receiving commands either from the laptop computer of the operator
on the surface if operating tethered, or creating commands (possibly?
Depends on how we decide to make this work) onboard. These commands come
mainly in the form of directional input from a controller, so the RasPi
computes what power level each motor should be at to achieve the desired
motion. Motor commands are then sent to the Arduino, which sends the
signals to the motors. The RasPi also reads information from the serial
connection to the Arduino, mainly sensor data from the vehicle's
sensors. The sensor data is used to adjust the control of the vehicle,
for example using gyroscope information to correct for unexpected roll,
etc. Sensor data will also be sent to the laptop of the operator to be
displayed. Connected to the RasPi is the UUV's camera, and the video
feed from the camera is sent to the operator computer to give the
operator a first-person view of the vehicle. When running autonomously,
the RasPi will also be responsible for running the computer vision
program that recognizes objects in the field of view of the camera.

## List of Tasks

The following is a list (in no particular order) of all tasks the
Raspberry Pi needs to be able to complete. Each item on this list can be
its own separate Python program, but it needs to be included in the
"main" program's "import" list at the start in order to be used.

-   Receive commands from surface operator's laptop computer.

-   Interpret and process commands from operator computer and send
    appropriate instructions to Arduino.

-   Send commands to Arduino over serial connection.

-   Receive sensor data from Arduino over serial connection.

-   Process sensor data, and use it to inform the desired system state
    of the vehicle when calculating motor speed values, etc.

-   Read camera feed from onboard camera and stream the feed to operator
    computer.

-   Send sensor data to operator computer.

-   (When in Autonomous Mode) Analyze environment data from sensors &
    camera to create virtual map of surroundings.

-   (When in Autonomous Mode) Use virtual map for object avoidance &
    mission objective completion.

Each of these tasks is elaborated on below.

# Operator Computer

## Overview

The operator computer is the human interface with the UUV. It can be any
personal computer with an Ethernet port and a USB port, but is assumed
to be a laptop computer. The UUV and the operator computer communicate
over an Ethernet cable (which is part of the vehicle's tether system)
using statically configured IPv4 addresses. Connected to the operator
computer via USB is the gamepad controller which serves as the primary
method for controlling the vehicle. The program which runs on the
operator computer reads input data from the gamepad and sends the data
over the Ethernet cable to the UUV's Raspberry Pi. Data from the RasPi,
such as video feed from the camera and sensor readings, are received by
the operator computer, and the operator program displays them for the
operator to see. The operator program may also be used to send commands
to the vehicle, either for testing & debugging purposes, or to allow
specific control over any of the vehicle's functions.

Commit message:

Added entry for Raspberry Pi main program

Documents/Software Documentation/Software List & Explainer.md, after:

---
subtitle: Olympic College Engineering Club
title: |

  Unmanned Underwater Vehicle Software Documentation
---

> ***[NOTE:]{.underline}** This is a "**[living
> document]{.underline}**", and as such will be updated on a
> semi-regular basis. Please ensure you have the **[latest
> version]{.underline}** of this document at all times.*

Table of Contents

[Overview 3](#overview)

[Arduino 4](#arduino)

[Overview 4](#overview-1)

[List of Tasks 4](#list-of-tasks)

[Main 4](#main)

[Raspberry Pi 6](#raspberry-pi)

[Overview 6](#overview-2)

[List of Tasks 6](#list-of-tasks-1)

[Main 6](#main-1)

[Operator Computer 8](#operator-computer)

[Overview 8](#overview-3)

# Overview

This document serves as a comprehensive reference for all software
programs necessary for the operation of Olympic College Engineering
Club's (OCEC) Unmanned Underwater Vehicle (UUV). This is a "living
document", and as such will be updated on a sem-regular basis. Please
ensure you have the most recent version of this document at all times.
This document consists only of a list and explanation for the software
of the project, and does not contain any source code or compiled binary
code. Please see the appropriate section on the project's GitHub
repository for the source code.

Software tasks on board the UUV are handled by two main components: A
miniature computer called a Raspberry Pi (RasPi), and a microcontroller
called an Arduino. The Raspberry Pi is the more powerful of the two, so
the majority of computational tasks are run there. Programs for the
RasPi will be written primarily in Python 3.0, which is considered a
beginner-friendly programming language. The Arduino is responsible for
controlling servos and motors by sending the control signals that those
components expect, as well as receive data from sensors and reporting it
to the Raspberry Pi. Programs for the Arduino are written in C++, which
is a somewhat more involved language that may be challenging for
beginners to learn. Arduinos do not have and operating system to handle
multiple programs running at once, so only a single program can be
uploaded to and run by the Arduino at any one time. To make the software
easier to write, maintain, and understand, the Arduino program will be
broken down into smaller parts that the "main" program will compile into
a single binary file, which gets uploaded to the Arduino.

In addition to the UUV's onboard computers, a laptop computer is used by
the operator to control the vehicle and view telemetry coming from it.
The program for interfacing with the UUV from this "operator computer"
will be written in Python, and the operator computer will communicate
with the UUV's Raspberry Pi over an Ethernet connection. The operator
computer will also be connected to a gamepad controller, which is the
primary means of controlling the vehicle. Controller input data are read
by the operator computer, and sent to the vehicle's onboard RasPi for
processing. Video data from the vehicle's camera and sensor data from
the various sensors will be displayed on the operator computer screen as
part of the operator program.

The RasPi and Arduino communicate over a serial connection between them.
Arduino has built-in functionality to send and receive data over serial,
and the Raspberry Pi software will use the Python serial library to read
and send data. Messages between the two will be in a standardized form
to make communication predictable and modular.

# Arduino

## Overview

The UUV uses an Arduino Mega 2560 for most of the interaction between
the software layer and the electronics layer. The digital and analog
pins on the Arduino connect to sensors (eg. thermistors, gyroscope,
accelerometer, etc), thruster motors via electronic speed controls
(ESCs), servos, and any other peripheral devices on board the vehicle.
The Arduino communicates with the UUV's onboard computer (the Raspberry
Pi) to report sensor data and receive commands for motor power and servo
angle, etc. Programs for the Arduino are written in C++, and the Arduino
can only have one program uploaded & running at any time. To make
programming for the Arduino easier to manage and more collaborative, its
software will be divided into smaller sub-programs, each of which
contain the functionality for a single aspect of the Arduino's
responsibilities, and which will be combined into the "main" program at
compile time using the "include" keyword in C++.

## List of Tasks

The following is a list (in no particular order) of all the tasks that
the Arduino program needs to be able to complete. Each item on this list
can be partitioned into its own sub-program.

-   Send and receive serial data to and from the Raspberry Pi.

-   Interpret received commands from the RasPi and call corresponding
    functions.

-   Package data from sensors into messages to send to RasPi.

-   Set motors (via ESCs) to a specific speed value.

-   Set servo(s) to a specific angle value.

-   Read sensor data from analog sensors and digital sensors. Each
    sensor will have its own sub-program that interfaces with the sensor
    according to the datasheet and pinout of the sensor.

Each of these tasks is elaborated on below.

## Main

The main program of the Arduino is the program that will be used when
compiling and uploading to the Arduino. In order to use functions from
the sub-programs, each sub-program should be included in the main
program using the "include" keyword at the beginning of the file. This
will also require the sub-program's file to be located in a directory in
the "include path" of the compiler (or the include path of the compiler
is updated to add the directory where the sub-programs are already
located). The main program is also where global variables are declared &
defined, so that they can be passed to any functions that need them.

Arduino programs are made up of two primary functions: the "setup"
function, and the "loop" function. The setup function runs once whenever
the program starts, which happens when the program is uploaded to the
board, when the board is powered up if the program is already uploaded,
and also if the "reset" button on the board is pressed while the board
is running. The "setup" function in the main program should be used for
tasks like setting the serial baud rate (the rate that signals are sent
over the serial connection), initializing any objects that will be used
in the program (eg. "Servo" objects for servos and ESCs), etc. The loop
function runs after the setup function completes, and it also runs every
time it finishes, which results in it running indefinitely as long as
the Arduino is powered. This is where the majority of calls to the
functions from sub-programs will be located, as many of them need to be
constantly operating for as long as the vehicle is powered on. Examples
of tasks that need to be completed every loop cycle are: reading the
information from the serial connection to the Raspberry Pi, reading the
values of all connected sensors, updating speeds and angles for ESCs and
servos, sending telemetry to the Raspberry Pi over the serial
connection, etc. Keeping the loop function readable is very important,
which is part of why the tasks of the Arduino are partitioned off into
sub-programs. Descriptive function names that only take one line of code
are easier to read than long sections of loops and conditional
statements that achieve that same thing.

# Raspberry Pi

## Overview

The Raspberry Pi is the main computer onboard the UUV. It is responsible
for receiving commands either from the laptop computer of the operator
on the surface if operating tethered, or creating commands (possibly?
Depends on how we decide to make this work) onboard. These commands come
mainly in the form of directional input from a controller, so the RasPi
computes what power level each motor should be at to achieve the desired
motion. Motor commands are then sent to the Arduino, which sends the
signals to the motors. The RasPi also reads information from the serial
connection to the Arduino, mainly sensor data from the vehicle's
sensors. The sensor data is used to adjust the control of the vehicle,
for example using gyroscope information to correct for unexpected roll,
etc. Sensor data will also be sent to the laptop of the operator to be
displayed. Connected to the RasPi is the UUV's camera, and the video
feed from the camera is sent to the operator computer to give the
operator a first-person view of the vehicle. When running autonomously,
the RasPi will also be responsible for running the computer vision
program that recognizes objects in the field of view of the camera.

## List of Tasks

The following is a list (in no particular order) of all tasks the
Raspberry Pi needs to be able to complete. Each item on this list can be
its own separate Python program, but it needs to be included in the
"main" program's "import" list at the start in order to be used.

-   Receive commands from surface operator's laptop computer.

-   Interpret and process commands from operator computer and send
    appropriate instructions to Arduino.

-   Send commands to Arduino over serial connection.

-   Receive sensor data from Arduino over serial connection.

-   Process sensor data, and use it to inform the desired system state
    of the vehicle when calculating motor speed values, etc.

-   Read camera feed from onboard camera and stream the feed to operator
    computer.

-   Send sensor data to operator computer.

-   (When in Autonomous Mode) Analyze environment data from sensors &
    camera to create virtual map of surroundings.

-   (When in Autonomous Mode) Use virtual map for object avoidance &
    mission objective completion.

Each of these tasks is elaborated on below.

## Main

The main program running on the Raspberry Pi is where calls to all the
other functions will be, along with global variables and the "import"
keywords for all the other python scripts that the RasPi will need
access to. In order for the "import" keyword to find the script, it
needs to be located in a directory listed in the "import path" of the
Python environment. Unlike Arduino, the Python language does not have
built-in "setup" and "loop" functions. Any tasks that need to be run
once, on startup, can be either at the beginning of the script, or in a
custom function which is called near the start of the script. Tasks that
need to repeat indefinitely while the program is running should be
placed in a loop that runs forever, or in a function which itself is in
a loop that runs forever. This will achieve the same effect as the
"setup" and "loop" functions found in Arduino programs.

# Operator Computer

## Overview

The operator computer is the human interface with the UUV. It can be any
personal computer with an Ethernet port and a USB port, but is assumed
to be a laptop computer. The UUV and the operator computer communicate
over an Ethernet cable (which is part of the vehicle's tether system)
using statically configured IPv4 addresses. Connected to the operator
computer via USB is the gamepad controller which serves as the primary
method for controlling the vehicle. The program which runs on the
operator computer reads input data from the gamepad and sends the data
over the Ethernet cable to the UUV's Raspberry Pi. Data from the RasPi,
such as video feed from the camera and sensor readings, are received by
the operator computer, and the operator program displays them for the
operator to see. The operator program may also be used to send commands
to the vehicle, either for testing & debugging purposes, or to allow
specific control over any of the vehicle's functions.
